[Chapter 3: Economics and the Revolt Against Reason]
[Part 1: Human Action]
[Chunk 7/7]

emotions influence a man’s reasoning very much. Nobody ever ventured to deny this obvious fact, and Marxism cannot be credited with its discovery. But it is without any significance for epistemology. There are many sources both of success and of error. It is the task of psychology to enumerate and to classify them. Envy is a widespread frailty. It is certain that many intellectuals envy the higher income of prosperous businessmen and that these feelings drive them toward socialism. They believe that the authorities of a socialist commonwealth would pay them higher salaries than those that they earn under capitalism. But to prove the existence of this envy does not relieve science of the duty of making the most careful examination of the socialist doctrines. Scientists are bound to deal with every doctrine as if its supporters were inspired by nothing else than the thirst for knowledge. The various brands of polylogism substitute for a purely theoretical examination of opposite doctrines the unmasking of the background and the motives of their authors. Such a procedure is incompatible with the first principles of ratiocination. It is a poor makeshift to dispose of a theory by referring to its historical background, to the “spirit” of its time, to the material conditions of the country of its origin, and to any personal qualities of its authors. A theory is subject to the tribunal of reason only. The yardstick to be applied is always the yardstick of reason. A theory is either correct or incorrect. It may happen that the present state of our knowledge does not allow a decision with regard to its correctness or incorrectness. But a theory can never be valid for a bourgeois or an American if it is invalid for a proletarian or a Chinese. If the Marxians and the racists were right, it would be impossible to explain why those in power are anxious to suppress dissenting theories and to persecute their supporters. The very fact that there are intolerant governments and political parties intent upon outlawing and exterminating dissenters, is a proof of the excellence of reason. It is not a conclusive proof of a doctrine’s correctness that its adversaries use the police, the hangman, and violent mobs to fight it. But it is a proof of the fact that those taking recourse to violent oppression are in their subconsciousness convinced of the untenability of their own doctrines. It is impossible to demonstrate the validity of the a priori foundations of logic and praxeology without referring to these foundations themselves. Reason is an ultimate given and cannot be analyzed or questioned by itself. The very existence of human reason is a nonrational fact. The only statement that can be predicated with regard to reason is that it is the mark that distinguishes man from animals and has brought about everything that is specifically human. To those pretending that man would be happier if he were to renounce the use of reason and try to let himself be guided by intuition and instincts only, no other answer can be given than an analysis of the achievements of human society. In describing the genesis and working of social cooperation, economics provides all the information required for an ultimate decision between reason and unreason. If man reconsiders freeing himself from the supremacy of reason, he must know what he will have to forsake. 41. Cf., for instance, Louis Rougier, Les Paralogismes du rationalisme (Paris, 1920). 42. Cf. Joseph Dietzgen, Briefe über Logik, speziell demokratisch-proletarische Logik (2d ed. Stuttgart, 1903), p. 112. 43. Cf. Franz Oppenheimer, System der Soziologie (Jena, 1926), II, 559. 44. It must be emphasized that the case for democracy is not based on the assumption that majorities are always right, still less that they are infallible. Cf. below, pp. 149-151. 45. Cf. his speech on the Party Convention in Nuremberg, September 3, 1933 ( Frankfurter Zeitung, September 4, 1933, p. 2). 46. Cf. Lancelot Hogben, Science for the Citizen (New York, 1938), pp. 726-728. 47. Ibid., p. 726. 48. Although the term rationalization is new, the thing itself was known long ago. Cf., for instance, the words of Benjamin Franklin: “So convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for every thing one has a mind to do.” ( Autobiography, ed. New York, 1944, p. 41.) 49. “Le moulin à bras vous donnera la société avec le souzerain; le moulin à vapeur, la société avec le capitaliste industriel.” Marx, Misère de la philosophie (Paris and Brussels, 1847), p. 100. 50. Marx, Das Kapital (7th ed. Hamburg, 1914), I, 728-729. 51. The Communist Manifesto, I. 52. The meaning that contemporary Marxism attaches to this phrase, viz., that the religious drug has been purposely administered to the people, may have been the meaning of Marx too. But it was not implied in the passage in which—in 1843—Marx coined this phrase. Cf. R. P. Casey, Religion in Russia (New York, 1946), pp. 67-69. 53. Cf. L. G. Tirala, Rasse, Geist and Seele (Munich, 1935), pp. 190 ff. 54. Cf. Morris R. Cohen, Reason and Nature (New York, 1931), pp. 202-205; A Preface to Logic (New York, 1944), pp. 42-44, 54-56, 92, 180-187. 55. Cf. above, pp. 46-47. 56. Cf. above, pp. 57-58. 57. See below, pp. 159-164. FIRST 42 LAST Categories: Ludwig von Mises