[Chapter 4: A First Analysis of the Category of Action]
[Part 1: Human Action]
[Chunk 1/3]

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics By Ludwig Mises IT GIVES me great satisfaction to see this book, handsomely printed by a distinguished publishing house, appear in its third revised edition. Two terminological remarks may be in order. First, I employ the term “liberal” in the sense attached to it everywhere in the nineteenth century and still today in the countries of continental Europe. This usage is imperative because there is simply no other term available to signify the great political and intellectual movement that substituted free enterprise and the market economy for the precapitalistic methods of production; constitutional representative government for the absolutism of kings or oligarchies; and freedom of all individuals for slavery, serfdom, and other forms of bondage…. [From the Forward to the Third Edition] Book Cover First Pub. Date 1949 Publisher Irvington-on-Hudson, NY: The Foundation for Economic Education Pub. Date 1998 Comments Printed 1998. 4th revised edition. Foreword by Bettina Bien Greaves. Copyright The text of this edition is under copyright. Picture of Ludwig von Mises: file photo, Liberty Fund, Inc. Table of Contents Foreword to Fourth Edition, by Bettina Bien Greaves Foreword to the Third Edition Introduction Part 1, Chapter I. Acting man Part 1, Chapter II. The epistemological problems of the sciences of human action Part 1, Chapter III. Economics and the revolt against reason Part 1, Chapter IV. A first analysis of the category of action Part 1, Chapter V. Time Part 1, Chapter VI. Uncertainty Part 1, Chapter VII. Action within the world Part 2, Chapter VIII. Human society Part 2, Chapter IX. The role of ideas Part 2, Chapter X. Exchange within society Part 3, Chapter XI. Valuation without calculation Part 3, Chapter XII. The sphere of economic calculation Part 3, Chapter XIII. Monetary calculation as a tool of action Part 4, Chapter XIV. The scope and method of catallactics Part 4, Chapter XV. The market Part 4, Chapter XVI. Prices Part 4, Chapter XVII. Indirect exchange Part 4, Chapter XVIII. Action in the passing of time Part 4, Chapter XIX. Interest Part 4, Chapter XX. Interest, credit expansion, and the trade cycle Part 4, Chapter XXI. Work and wages Part 4, Chapter XXII. The nonhuman original factors of production Part 4, Chapter XXIII. The data of the market Part 4, Chapter XXIV. Harmony and conflict of interests Part 5, Chapter XXV. The imaginary construction of a socialist society Part 5, Chapter XXVI. The impossibility of economic calculation under socialism Part 6, Chapter XXVII. The government and the market Part 6, Chapter XXVIII. Interference by taxation Part 6, Chapter XXIX. Restriction of production Part 6, Chapter XXX. Interference with the structure of prices Part 6, Chapter XXXI. Currency and credit manipulation Part 6, Chapter XXXII. Confiscation and redistribution Part 6, Chapter XXXIII. Syndicalism and corporativism Part 6, Chapter XXXIV. The economics of war Part 6, Chapter XXXV. The welfare principle versus the market principle Part 6, Chapter XXXVI. The crisis of interventionism Part 7, Chapter XXXVII. The nondescript character of economics Part 7, Chapter XXXVIII. The place of economics in learning Part 7, Chapter XXXIX. Economics and the essential problems of human existence FIRST 42 LAST Part 1, Chapter IV. A FIRST ANALYSIS OF THE CATEGORY OF ACTION 1. Ends and Means THE result sought by an action is called its end, goal, or aim. One uses these terms in ordinary speech also to signify intermediate ends, goals, or aims; these are points which acting man wants to attain only because he believes that he will reach his ultimate end, goal, or aim in passing beyond them. Strictly speaking the end, goal, or aim of any action is always the relief from a felt uneasiness. A means is what serves to the attainment of any end, goal, or aim. Means are not in the given universe; in this universe there exist only things. A thing becomes a means when human reason plans to employ it for the attainment of some end and human action really employs it for this purpose. Thinking man sees the serviceableness of things, i.e., their ability to minister to his ends, and acting man makes them means. It is of primary importance to realize that parts of the external world become means only through the operation of the human mind and its offshoot, human action. External objects are as such only phenomena of the physical universe and the subject matter of the natural sciences. It is human meaning and action which transform them into means. Praxeology does not deal with the external world, but with man’s conduct with regard to it. Praxeological reality is not the physical universe, but man’s conscious reaction to the given state of this universe. Economics is not about things and tangible material objects; it is about men, their meanings and actions. Goods, commodities, and wealth and all the other notions of conduct are not elements of nature; they are elements of human meaning and conduct. He who wants to deal with them must not look at the external world; he must search for them in the meaning of acting men. Praxeology and economics do not deal with human meaning and action as they should be or would be if all men were inspired by an absolutely valid philosophy and equipped with a perfect knowledge of technology. For such notions as absolute validity and omniscience there is no room in the frame of a science whose subject matter is erring man. An end is everything which men aim at. A means is everything which acting men consider as such. It is the task of scientific technology and therapeutics to explode errors in their respective fields. It is the task of economics to expose erroneous doctrines in the field of social action. But if men do not follow the advice of science, but cling to their fallacious prejudices, these errors are reality and must be dealt with as such. Economists consider foreign exchange control as inappropriate to attain the ends aimed at by those who take recourse to it. However, if public opinion does not abandon its delusions and governments consequently resort to foreign exchange control, the course of events is determined by this attitude. Present-day medicine considers the doctrine of the therapeutic effects of mandrake as a fable. But as long as people took this fable as truth, mandrake was an economic good and prices were paid for its acquisition. In dealing with prices economics does not ask what things are in the eyes of other people, but only what they are in the meaning of those intent upon getting them. For it deals with real prices, paid and received in real transactions, not with prices as they would be if men were different from what they really are. Means are necessarily always limited, i.e., scarce with regard to the services for which man wants to use them. If this were not the case, there would not be any action with regard to them. Where man is not restrained by the insufficient quantity of things available, there is no need for any action. It is customary to call the end the ultimate good and the means goods. In applying this terminology economists mainly used to think as technologists and not as praxeologists. They differentiated between free goods and economic goods. They called free goods those things which, being available in superfluous abundance, do not need to be economized. Such goods are, however, not the object of any action. They are general conditions of human welfare; they are parts of the natural environment in which man lives and acts. Only the economic goods are the substratum of action. They alone are dealt with in economics. Economic goods which in themselves are fitted to satisfy human wants directly and whose serviceableness does not depend on the cooperation of other economic goods, are called consumers’ goods or goods of the first order. Means which can satisfy wants only indirectly when complemented by cooperation of other goods are called producers’ goods or factors of production or goods of a remoter or higher order. The services rendered by a producers’ good consist in bringing about, by the cooperation of complementary producers’ goods, a product. This product may be a consumers’ good; it may be a producers’ good which when combined with other producers’ goods will finally bring about a consumers’ good. It is possible to think of the producers’ goods as arranged in orders according to their proximity to the consumers’ good for whose production they can be used. Those producers’ goods which are nearest to the production of a consumers’ good are ranged in the second order, and accordingly those which are used for the production of goods of the second order in the third order and so on. The purpose of such an arrangement of goods in orders is to provide a basis for the theory of value and prices of the factors of production. It will be shown later how the valuation and the prices