[Chapter 19: The Rate of Interest]
[Part 4: Catallactics or Economics of the Market Society]
[Chunk 1/5]

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics By Ludwig Mises IT GIVES me great satisfaction to see this book, handsomely printed by a distinguished publishing house, appear in its third revised edition. Two terminological remarks may be in order. First, I employ the term “liberal” in the sense attached to it everywhere in the nineteenth century and still today in the countries of continental Europe. This usage is imperative because there is simply no other term available to signify the great political and intellectual movement that substituted free enterprise and the market economy for the precapitalistic methods of production; constitutional representative government for the absolutism of kings or oligarchies; and freedom of all individuals for slavery, serfdom, and other forms of bondage…. [From the Forward to the Third Edition] Book Cover First Pub. Date 1949 Publisher Irvington-on-Hudson, NY: The Foundation for Economic Education Pub. Date 1998 Comments Printed 1998. 4th revised edition. Foreword by Bettina Bien Greaves. Copyright The text of this edition is under copyright. Picture of Ludwig von Mises: file photo, Liberty Fund, Inc. Table of Contents Foreword to Fourth Edition, by Bettina Bien Greaves Foreword to the Third Edition Introduction Part 1, Chapter I. Acting man Part 1, Chapter II. The epistemological problems of the sciences of human action Part 1, Chapter III. Economics and the revolt against reason Part 1, Chapter IV. A first analysis of the category of action Part 1, Chapter V. Time Part 1, Chapter VI. Uncertainty Part 1, Chapter VII. Action within the world Part 2, Chapter VIII. Human society Part 2, Chapter IX. The role of ideas Part 2, Chapter X. Exchange within society Part 3, Chapter XI. Valuation without calculation Part 3, Chapter XII. The sphere of economic calculation Part 3, Chapter XIII. Monetary calculation as a tool of action Part 4, Chapter XIV. The scope and method of catallactics Part 4, Chapter XV. The market Part 4, Chapter XVI. Prices Part 4, Chapter XVII. Indirect exchange Part 4, Chapter XVIII. Action in the passing of time Part 4, Chapter XIX. Interest Part 4, Chapter XX. Interest, credit expansion, and the trade cycle Part 4, Chapter XXI. Work and wages Part 4, Chapter XXII. The nonhuman original factors of production Part 4, Chapter XXIII. The data of the market Part 4, Chapter XXIV. Harmony and conflict of interests Part 5, Chapter XXV. The imaginary construction of a socialist society Part 5, Chapter XXVI. The impossibility of economic calculation under socialism Part 6, Chapter XXVII. The government and the market Part 6, Chapter XXVIII. Interference by taxation Part 6, Chapter XXIX. Restriction of production Part 6, Chapter XXX. Interference with the structure of prices Part 6, Chapter XXXI. Currency and credit manipulation Part 6, Chapter XXXII. Confiscation and redistribution Part 6, Chapter XXXIII. Syndicalism and corporativism Part 6, Chapter XXXIV. The economics of war Part 6, Chapter XXXV. The welfare principle versus the market principle Part 6, Chapter XXXVI. The crisis of interventionism Part 7, Chapter XXXVII. The nondescript character of economics Part 7, Chapter XXXVIII. The place of economics in learning Part 7, Chapter XXXIX. Economics and the essential problems of human existence FIRST 42 LAST Part 4, Chapter XIX. INTEREST 1. The Phenomenon of Interest IT has been shown that time preference is a category inherent in every human action. Time preference manifests itself in the phenomenon of originary interest, i.e., the discount of future goods as against present goods. Interest is not merely interest on capital. Interest is not the specific income derived from the utilization of capital goods. The correspondence between three factors of production—labor, capital, and land—and three classes of income—wages, profit, and rent—as taught by the classical economists is untenable. Rent is not the specific revenue from land. Rent is a general catallactic phenomenon; it plays in the yield of labor and capital goods the same role it plays in the yield of land. Furthermore there is no homogeneous source of income that could be called profit in the sense in which the classical economists applied this term. Profit (in the sense of entrepreneurial profit) and interest are no more characteristic of capital than they are of land. The prices of consumers’ goods are by the interplay of the forces operating on the market apportioned to the various complementary factors cooperating in their production. As the consumers’ goods are present goods, while the factors of production are means for the production of future goods, and as present goods are valued higher than future goods of the same kind and quantity, the sum thus apportioned, even in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy, falls behind the present price of the consumers’ goods concerned. This difference is the originary interest. It is not specifically connected with any of the three classes of factors of production which the classical economists distinguished. Entrepreneurial profit and loss are produced by changes in the data and the resulting price changes which occur in the passing of the period of production. Naïve reasoning does not see any problem in the current revenue derived from hunting, fishing, cattle breeding, forestry, and agriculture. Nature generates deer, fish, and cattle and makes them grow, causes the cows to give milk and the chickens to lay eggs, the trees to put on wood and to bear fruit, and the seeds to shoot into ears. He who has a title to appropriate for himself this recurring wealth enjoys a steady income. Like a stream which continually carries new water, the “stream of income” flows continually and conveys again and again new wealth. The whole process appears as a natural phenomenon. But for the economist a problem is presented in the determination of prices for land, cattle, and all the rest. If future goods were not bought and sold at a discount as against present goods, the buyer of land would have to pay a price which equals the sum of all future net revenues and which would leave nothing for a current reiterated income. The yearly recurring proceeds of the owners of land and cattle are not marked by any characteristic which would catallactically distinguish them from the proceeds stemming from produced factors of production which are used up sooner or later in the processes of production. The power of disposal over a piece of land is the control of this field’s cooperation in the production of all the fruit which can ever be grown on it, and the power of disposal over a mine is the control of its cooperation in the extraction of all the minerals which can ever be brought to the surface from it. In the same way the ownership of a machine or a bale of cotton is the control of its cooperation in the manufacture of all goods which are produced with its cooperation. The fundamental fallacy implied in all the productivity and use approaches to the problem of interest was that they traced back the phenomenon of interest to these productive services rendered by the factors of production. However, the serviceableness of the factors of production determines the prices paid for them, not interest. These prices exhaust the whole difference between the productivity of a process aided by a definite factor’s cooperation and that of a process lacking this cooperation. The difference between the sum of the prices of the complementary factors of production and the products which emerges even in the absence of changes in the market data concerned, is an outcome of the higher valuation of present goods as compared with future goods. As production goes on, the factors of production are transformed or ripen into present goods of a higher value. This increment is the source of specific proceeds flowing into the hands of the owners of the factors of production, of originary interest. The owners of the material factors of production—as distinct from the pure entrepreneurs of the imaginary construction of an integration of catallactic functions—harvest two catallactically different items: the prices paid for the productive cooperation of the factors they control on the one hand and interest on the other hand. These two things must not be confused. It is not permissible to refer, in the explanation of interest, to the services rendered by the factors of production in the turning out of products. Interest is a homogeneous phenomenon. There are no different sources of interest. Interest on durable goods and interest on consumption-credit are like other kinds of interest an outgrowth of the higher valuation of present goods as against future goods. 2. Originary Interest Originary interest is the ratio of the value assigned to want-satisfaction in the immediate future and the value assigned to want-satisfaction in remote periods of the future. It manifests itself in the market economy in the discount of future goods as against present goods. It is a ratio of commodity prices, not a price in itself. There prevails a tendency toward the equalization of this ratio for all commodities. In the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy