[Chapter 24: Harmony and Conflict of Interests]
[Part 4: Catallactics or Economics of the Market Society]
[Chunk 1/9]

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics By Ludwig Mises IT GIVES me great satisfaction to see this book, handsomely printed by a distinguished publishing house, appear in its third revised edition. Two terminological remarks may be in order. First, I employ the term “liberal” in the sense attached to it everywhere in the nineteenth century and still today in the countries of continental Europe. This usage is imperative because there is simply no other term available to signify the great political and intellectual movement that substituted free enterprise and the market economy for the precapitalistic methods of production; constitutional representative government for the absolutism of kings or oligarchies; and freedom of all individuals for slavery, serfdom, and other forms of bondage…. [From the Forward to the Third Edition] Book Cover First Pub. Date 1949 Publisher Irvington-on-Hudson, NY: The Foundation for Economic Education Pub. Date 1998 Comments Printed 1998. 4th revised edition. Foreword by Bettina Bien Greaves. Copyright The text of this edition is under copyright. Picture of Ludwig von Mises: file photo, Liberty Fund, Inc. Table of Contents Foreword to Fourth Edition, by Bettina Bien Greaves Foreword to the Third Edition Introduction Part 1, Chapter I. Acting man Part 1, Chapter II. The epistemological problems of the sciences of human action Part 1, Chapter III. Economics and the revolt against reason Part 1, Chapter IV. A first analysis of the category of action Part 1, Chapter V. Time Part 1, Chapter VI. Uncertainty Part 1, Chapter VII. Action within the world Part 2, Chapter VIII. Human society Part 2, Chapter IX. The role of ideas Part 2, Chapter X. Exchange within society Part 3, Chapter XI. Valuation without calculation Part 3, Chapter XII. The sphere of economic calculation Part 3, Chapter XIII. Monetary calculation as a tool of action Part 4, Chapter XIV. The scope and method of catallactics Part 4, Chapter XV. The market Part 4, Chapter XVI. Prices Part 4, Chapter XVII. Indirect exchange Part 4, Chapter XVIII. Action in the passing of time Part 4, Chapter XIX. Interest Part 4, Chapter XX. Interest, credit expansion, and the trade cycle Part 4, Chapter XXI. Work and wages Part 4, Chapter XXII. The nonhuman original factors of production Part 4, Chapter XXIII. The data of the market Part 4, Chapter XXIV. Harmony and conflict of interests Part 5, Chapter XXV. The imaginary construction of a socialist society Part 5, Chapter XXVI. The impossibility of economic calculation under socialism Part 6, Chapter XXVII. The government and the market Part 6, Chapter XXVIII. Interference by taxation Part 6, Chapter XXIX. Restriction of production Part 6, Chapter XXX. Interference with the structure of prices Part 6, Chapter XXXI. Currency and credit manipulation Part 6, Chapter XXXII. Confiscation and redistribution Part 6, Chapter XXXIII. Syndicalism and corporativism Part 6, Chapter XXXIV. The economics of war Part 6, Chapter XXXV. The welfare principle versus the market principle Part 6, Chapter XXXVI. The crisis of interventionism Part 7, Chapter XXXVII. The nondescript character of economics Part 7, Chapter XXXVIII. The place of economics in learning Part 7, Chapter XXXIX. Economics and the essential problems of human existence FIRST 42 LAST Part 4, Chapter XXIV. HARMONY AND CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 1. The Ultimate Source of Profit and Loss on the Market THE changes in the data whose reiterated emergence prevents the economic system from turning into an evenly rotating economy and produces again and again entrepreneurial profit and loss are favorable to some members of society and unfavorable to others. Hence, people concluded, the gain of one man is the damage of another; no man profits but by the loss of others. This dogma was already advanced by some ancient authors. Among modern writers Montaigne was the first to restate it; we may fairly call it the Montaigne dogma. It was the quintessence of the doctrines of Mercantilism, old and new. It is at the bottom of all modern doctrines teaching that there prevails, within the frame of the market economy, an irreconcilable conflict among the interests of various social classes within a nation and furthermore between the interests of any nation and those of all other nations. *90 Now the Montaigne dogma is true with regard to the effects of cash-induced changes in the purchasing power of money on deferred payments. But it is entirely wrong with regard to any kind of entrepreneurial profit or loss, whether they emerge in a stationary economy in which the total amount of profits equals the total amount of losses or in a progressing or a retrogressing economy in which these two magnitudes are different. What produces a man’s profit in the course of affairs within an unhampered market society is not his fellow citizen’s plight and distress, but the fact that he alleviates or entirely removes what causes his fellow citizen’s feeling of uneasiness. What hurts the sick is the plague, not the physician who treats the disease. The doctor’s gain is not an outcome of the epidemics, but of the aid he gives to those affected. The ultimate source of profits is always the foresight of future conditions. Those who succeeded better than others in anticipating future events and in adjusting their activities to the future state of the market, reap profits because they are in a position to satisfy the most urgent needs of the public. The profits of those who have produced goods and services for which the buyers scramble are not the source of the losses of those who have brought to the market commodities in the purchase of which the public is not prepared to pay the full amount of production costs expended. These losses are caused by the lack of insight displayed in anticipating the future state of the market and the demand of the consumers. External events affecting demand and supply may sometimes come so suddenly and unexpectedly that people say that no reasonable man could have foreseen them. Then the envious may consider the profits of those who gain from the change as unjustified. Yet such arbitrary value judgments do not alter the real state of interests. It is certainly better for a sick man to be cured by a doctor for a high fee than to lack medical assistance. If it were otherwise, he would not consult the physician. There are in the market economy no conflicts between the interests of the buyers and sellers. There are disadvantages caused by inadequate foresight. It would be a universal boon if every man and all the members of the market society would always foresee future conditions correctly and in time and act accordingly. If this were the case, retrospection would establish that no particle of capital and labor was wasted for the satisfaction of wants which now are considered as less urgent than some other unsatisfied wants. However, man is not omniscient. It is wrong to look at these problems from the point of view of resentment and envy. It is no less faulty to restrict one’s observation to the momentary position of various individuals. These are social problems and must be judged with regard to the operation of the whole market system. What secures the best possible satisfaction of the demands of each member of society is precisely the fact that those who succeeded better than other people in anticipating future conditions are earning profits. If profits were to be curtailed for the benefit of those whom a change in the data has injured, the adjustment of supply to demand would not be improved but impaired. If one were to prevent doctors from occasionally earning high fees, one would not increase but rather decrease the number of those choosing the medical profession. The deal is always advantageous both for the buyer and the seller. Even a man who sells at a loss is still better off than he would be if he could not sell at all, or only at a still lower price. He loses on account of his lack of foresight; the sale limits his loss even if the price received is low. If both the buyer and the seller were not to consider the transaction as the most advantageous action they could choose under the prevailing conditions, they would not enter into the deal. The statement that one man’s boon is the other man’s damage is valid with regard to robbery, war, and booty. The robber’s plunder is the damage of the despoiled victim. But war and commerce are two different things. Voltaire erred when—in 1764—he wrote in the article “Patrie” of his Dictionnaire philosophique: “To be a good patriot is to wish that one’s own community should enrich itself by trade and acquire power by arms; it is obvious that a country cannot profit but at the expense of another and that it cannot conquer without inflicting harm on other people.” Voltaire, like so many other authors who preceded and followed him, deemed it superfluous to familiarize himself with economic thought. If he had read the