[Chapter 26: The Impossibility of Economic Calculation Under Socialism]
[Part 5: Social Cooperation Without a Market]
[Chunk 1/7]

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics By Ludwig Mises IT GIVES me great satisfaction to see this book, handsomely printed by a distinguished publishing house, appear in its third revised edition. Two terminological remarks may be in order. First, I employ the term “liberal” in the sense attached to it everywhere in the nineteenth century and still today in the countries of continental Europe. This usage is imperative because there is simply no other term available to signify the great political and intellectual movement that substituted free enterprise and the market economy for the precapitalistic methods of production; constitutional representative government for the absolutism of kings or oligarchies; and freedom of all individuals for slavery, serfdom, and other forms of bondage…. [From the Forward to the Third Edition] Book Cover First Pub. Date 1949 Publisher Irvington-on-Hudson, NY: The Foundation for Economic Education Pub. Date 1998 Comments Printed 1998. 4th revised edition. Foreword by Bettina Bien Greaves. Copyright The text of this edition is under copyright. Picture of Ludwig von Mises: file photo, Liberty Fund, Inc. Table of Contents Foreword to Fourth Edition, by Bettina Bien Greaves Foreword to the Third Edition Introduction Part 1, Chapter I. Acting man Part 1, Chapter II. The epistemological problems of the sciences of human action Part 1, Chapter III. Economics and the revolt against reason Part 1, Chapter IV. A first analysis of the category of action Part 1, Chapter V. Time Part 1, Chapter VI. Uncertainty Part 1, Chapter VII. Action within the world Part 2, Chapter VIII. Human society Part 2, Chapter IX. The role of ideas Part 2, Chapter X. Exchange within society Part 3, Chapter XI. Valuation without calculation Part 3, Chapter XII. The sphere of economic calculation Part 3, Chapter XIII. Monetary calculation as a tool of action Part 4, Chapter XIV. The scope and method of catallactics Part 4, Chapter XV. The market Part 4, Chapter XVI. Prices Part 4, Chapter XVII. Indirect exchange Part 4, Chapter XVIII. Action in the passing of time Part 4, Chapter XIX. Interest Part 4, Chapter XX. Interest, credit expansion, and the trade cycle Part 4, Chapter XXI. Work and wages Part 4, Chapter XXII. The nonhuman original factors of production Part 4, Chapter XXIII. The data of the market Part 4, Chapter XXIV. Harmony and conflict of interests Part 5, Chapter XXV. The imaginary construction of a socialist society Part 5, Chapter XXVI. The impossibility of economic calculation under socialism Part 6, Chapter XXVII. The government and the market Part 6, Chapter XXVIII. Interference by taxation Part 6, Chapter XXIX. Restriction of production Part 6, Chapter XXX. Interference with the structure of prices Part 6, Chapter XXXI. Currency and credit manipulation Part 6, Chapter XXXII. Confiscation and redistribution Part 6, Chapter XXXIII. Syndicalism and corporativism Part 6, Chapter XXXIV. The economics of war Part 6, Chapter XXXV. The welfare principle versus the market principle Part 6, Chapter XXXVI. The crisis of interventionism Part 7, Chapter XXXVII. The nondescript character of economics Part 7, Chapter XXXVIII. The place of economics in learning Part 7, Chapter XXXIX. Economics and the essential problems of human existence FIRST 42 LAST Part 5, Chapter XXVI. THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF ECONOMIC CALCULATION UNDER SOCIALISM 1. The Problem THE director wants to build a house. Now, there are many methods that can be resorted to. Each of them offers, from the point of view of the director, certain advantages and disadvantages with regard to the utilization of the future building, and results in a different duration of the building’s serviceableness; each of them requires other expenditures of building materials and labor and absorbs other periods of production. Which method should the director choose? He cannot reduce to a common denominator the items of various materials and various kinds of labor to be expended. Therefore he cannot compare them. He cannot attach either to the waiting time (period of production) or to the duration of serviceableness a definite numerical expression. In short, he cannot, in comparing costs to be expended and gains to be earned, resort to any arithmetical operation. The plans of his architects enumerate a vast multiplicity of various items in kind; they refer to the physical and chemical qualities of various materials and to the physical productivity of various machines, tools, and procedures. But all their statements remain unrelated to each other. There is no means of establishing any connection between them. Imagine the plight of the director when faced with a project. What he needs to know is whether or not the execution of the project will increase well-being, that is, add something to the wealth available without impairing the satisfaction of wants which he considers more urgent. But none of the reports he receives give him any clue to the solution of this problem. We may for the sake of argument at first disregard the dilemmas involved in the choice of consumers’ goods to be produced. We may assume that this problem is settled. But there is the embarrassing multitude of producers’ goods and the infinite variety of procedures that can be resorted to for manufacturing definite consumers’ goods. The most advantageous location of each industry and the optimum size of each plant and of each piece of equipment must be determined. One must determine what kind of mechanical power should be employed in each of them, and which of the various formulas for the production of this energy should be applied. All these problems are raised daily in thousands and thousands of cases. Each case offers special conditions and requires an individual solution appropriate to these special data. The number of elements with which the director’s decision has to deal is much greater than would be indicated by a merely technological description of the available producers’ goods in terms of physics and chemistry. The location of each of them must be taken into consideration as well as the serviceableness of the capital investments made in the past for their utilization. The director does not simply have to deal with coal as such, but with thousands and thousands of pits already in operation in various places, and with the possibilities for digging new pits, with the various methods of mining in each of them, with the different qualities of the coal in various deposits, with the various methods for utilizing the coal for the production of heat, power, and a great number of derivatives. It is permissible to say that the present state of technological knowledge makes it possible to produce almost anything out of almost everything. Our ancestors, for instance, knew only a limited number of employments for wood. Modern technology has added a multitude of possible new employments. Wood can be used for the production of paper, of various textile fibers, of foodstuffs, drugs, and many other synthetic products. Today two methods are resorted to for providing a city with clean water. Either one brings the water over long distances in aqueducts, an ancient method long practiced, or one chemically purifies the water available in the city’s neighborhood. Why does one not produce water synthetically in factories? Modern technology could easily solve the technological problems involved. The average man in his mental inertia is ready to ridicule such projects as sheer lunacy. However, the only reason why the synthetic production of drinking water today—perhaps not at a later day—is out of the question is that economic calculation in terms of money shows that it is a more expensive procedure than other methods. Eliminate economic calculation and you have no means of making a rational choice between the various alternatives. The socialists, it is true, object that economic calculation is not infallible. They say that the capitalists sometimes make mistakes in their calculation. Of course, this happens and will always happen. For all human action points to the future and the future is always uncertain. The most carefully elaborated plans are frustrated if expectations concerning the future are dashed to the ground. However, this is quite a different problem. Today we calculate from the point of view of our present knowledge and of our present anticipation of future conditions. We do not deal with the problem of whether or not the director will be able to anticipate future conditions. What we have in mind is that the director cannot calculate from the point of view of his own present value judgments and his own present anticipations of future conditions, whatever they may be. If he invests today in the canning industry, it may happen that a change in consumers’ tastes or in the hygienic opinions concerning the wholesomeness of canned food will one day turn his investment into a malinvestment. But how can he find out today how to build and equip a cannery most economically? Some railroad lines constructed at the turn of the century would not have been built if people had at that time anticipated the impending advance of motoring and aviation. But those who at that time built railroads knew