[Chapter 33: Syndicalism and Corporativism]
[Part 6: The Hampered Market Economy]
[Chunk 1/4]

Human Action: A Treatise on Economics By Ludwig Mises IT GIVES me great satisfaction to see this book, handsomely printed by a distinguished publishing house, appear in its third revised edition. Two terminological remarks may be in order. First, I employ the term “liberal” in the sense attached to it everywhere in the nineteenth century and still today in the countries of continental Europe. This usage is imperative because there is simply no other term available to signify the great political and intellectual movement that substituted free enterprise and the market economy for the precapitalistic methods of production; constitutional representative government for the absolutism of kings or oligarchies; and freedom of all individuals for slavery, serfdom, and other forms of bondage…. [From the Forward to the Third Edition] Book Cover First Pub. Date 1949 Publisher Irvington-on-Hudson, NY: The Foundation for Economic Education Pub. Date 1998 Comments Printed 1998. 4th revised edition. Foreword by Bettina Bien Greaves. Copyright The text of this edition is under copyright. Picture of Ludwig von Mises: file photo, Liberty Fund, Inc. Table of Contents Foreword to Fourth Edition, by Bettina Bien Greaves Foreword to the Third Edition Introduction Part 1, Chapter I. Acting man Part 1, Chapter II. The epistemological problems of the sciences of human action Part 1, Chapter III. Economics and the revolt against reason Part 1, Chapter IV. A first analysis of the category of action Part 1, Chapter V. Time Part 1, Chapter VI. Uncertainty Part 1, Chapter VII. Action within the world Part 2, Chapter VIII. Human society Part 2, Chapter IX. The role of ideas Part 2, Chapter X. Exchange within society Part 3, Chapter XI. Valuation without calculation Part 3, Chapter XII. The sphere of economic calculation Part 3, Chapter XIII. Monetary calculation as a tool of action Part 4, Chapter XIV. The scope and method of catallactics Part 4, Chapter XV. The market Part 4, Chapter XVI. Prices Part 4, Chapter XVII. Indirect exchange Part 4, Chapter XVIII. Action in the passing of time Part 4, Chapter XIX. Interest Part 4, Chapter XX. Interest, credit expansion, and the trade cycle Part 4, Chapter XXI. Work and wages Part 4, Chapter XXII. The nonhuman original factors of production Part 4, Chapter XXIII. The data of the market Part 4, Chapter XXIV. Harmony and conflict of interests Part 5, Chapter XXV. The imaginary construction of a socialist society Part 5, Chapter XXVI. The impossibility of economic calculation under socialism Part 6, Chapter XXVII. The government and the market Part 6, Chapter XXVIII. Interference by taxation Part 6, Chapter XXIX. Restriction of production Part 6, Chapter XXX. Interference with the structure of prices Part 6, Chapter XXXI. Currency and credit manipulation Part 6, Chapter XXXII. Confiscation and redistribution Part 6, Chapter XXXIII. Syndicalism and corporativism Part 6, Chapter XXXIV. The economics of war Part 6, Chapter XXXV. The welfare principle versus the market principle Part 6, Chapter XXXVI. The crisis of interventionism Part 7, Chapter XXXVII. The nondescript character of economics Part 7, Chapter XXXVIII. The place of economics in learning Part 7, Chapter XXXIX. Economics and the essential problems of human existence FIRST 42 LAST Part 6, Chapter XXXIII. SYNDICALISM AND CORPORATIVISM 1. The Syndicalist Idea THE term syndicalism is used to signify two entirely different things. Syndicalism, as used by the partisans of Georges Sorel, means special revolutionary tactics to be resorted to for the realization of socialism. Labor unions, it implies, should not waste their strength in the task of improving the conditions of wage earners within the frame of capitalism. They should adopt action directe, unflinching violence to destroy all the institutions of capitalism. They should never cease to fight—in the genuine sense of the term—for their ultimate goal, socialism. The proletarians must not let themselves be fooled by the catchwords of the bourgeoisie, such as liberty, democracy, representative government. They must seek their salvation in the class struggle, in bloody revolutionary upheavals and in the pitiless annihilation of the bourgeois. This doctrine played and still plays an enormous role in modern politics. It has provided essential ideas to Russian Bolshevism, Italian Fascism, and German Nazism. But it is a purely political issue and may be disregarded in a catallactic analysis. The second meaning of the term syndicalism refers to a program of society’s economic organization. While socialism aims at the substitution of government ownership of the means of production for private ownership, syndicalism wants to give the ownership of the plants to the workers employed in them. Such slogans as “The railroads to the railroadmen” or “The mines to the miners” best indicate the ultimate goals of syndicalism. The ideas of socialism and those of syndicalism in the sense of action directe were developed by intellectuals whom consistent adepts of all Marxian sects cannot help describing as bourgeois. But the idea of syndicalism as a system of social organization is a genuine product of the “proletarian mind.” It is precisely what the naïve employee considers a fair and expedient means for improving his own material well-being. Eliminate the idle parasites, the entrepreneurs and capitalists, and give their “unearned incomes” to the workers! Nothing could be simpler. If one were to take these plans seriously, one would not have to deal with them in a discussion of the problems of interventionism. One would have to realize that syndicalism is neither socialism, nor capitalism, nor interventionism, but a system of its own different from these three schemes. However, one cannot take the syndicalist program seriously, and nobody ever has. Nobody has been so confused and injudicious as to advocate syndicalism openly as a social system. Syndicalism has played a role in the discussion of economic issues only as far as certain programs unwittingly contained syndicalist features. There are elements of syndicalism in certain objectives of government and labor-union interference with market phenomena. There are, moreover, guild socialism and corporativism, which pretended to avoid the government omnipotence inherent in all socialist and interventionist ventures by adulterating them with a syndicalist admixture. 2. The Fallacies of Syndicalism The root of the syndicalist idea is to be seen in the belief that entrepreneurs and capitalists are irresponsible autocrats who are free to conduct their affairs arbitrarily. Such a dictatorship must not be tolerated. The liberal movement, which has substituted representative government for the despotism of hereditary kings and aristocrats, must crown its achievements by substituting “industrial democracy” for the tyranny of hereditary capitalists and entrepreneurs. The economic revolution must bring to a climax the liberation of the people which the political revolution has inaugurated. The fundamental error of this argument is obvious. The entrepreneurs and capitalists are not irresponsible autocrats. They are unconditionally subject to the sovereignty of the consumers. The market is a consumers’ democracy. The syndicalists want to transform it into a producers’ democracy. This idea is fallacious, for the sole end and purpose of production is consumption. What the syndicalist considers the most serious defect of the capitalist system and disparages as the brutality and callousness of autocratic profit-seekers is precisely the outcome of the supremacy of the consumers. Under the competitive conditions of the unhampered market economy the entrepreneurs are forced to improve technological methods of production without regard to the vested interests of the workers. The employer is forced never to pay workers more than corresponds to the consumers’ appraisal of their achievements. If an employee asks for a raise because his wife has borne him a new baby and the employer refuses on the ground that the infant does not contribute to the factory’s effort, the employer acts as the mandatary of the consumers. These consumers are not prepared to pay more for any commodity merely because the worker has a large family. The naïveté of the syndicalists manifests itself in the fact that they would never concede to those producing the articles, which they themselves are using, the same privileges which they claim for themselves. The syndicalist principle requires that the shares of every corporation should be taken away from “absentee ownership” and be equally distributed among the employees; payment of interest and principal of debts is to be discontinued. “Management” will then be placed in the hands of a board elected by the workers who are now also the shareholders. This mode of confiscation and redistribution will not bring about equality within the nation or the world. It would give more to the employees of those enterprises in which the quota of capital invested per worker is greater and less to those in which it is smaller. It is a characteristic fact that the syndicalists in dealing with these issues always refer to management and never mention entrepreneurial activities. As the average subordinate employee sees things, all that is to be done in the conduct of business is to accomplish those ancillary tasks which are entrusted to the managerial hierarchy within the frame of the entrepreneurial plans. In his eyes the individual plant or workshop as it exists and operates today is a