[Chapter 35: The Welfare Principle Versus the Market Principle]
[Part 6: The Hampered Market Economy]
[Chunk 8/8]

of restricting output. Thus they are the harbingers of economic retrogression, preaching a philosophy of decay and social disintegration. A society arranged according to their precepts may appear to some people as fair from the point of view of an arbitrary standard of social justice. But it will certainly be a society of progressing poverty for all its members. For more than a century public opinion in Western countries has been deluded by the idea that there is such a thing as “the social question” or “the labor problem.” The meaning implied was that the very existence of capitalism hurts the vital interests of the masses, especially those of the wage earners and the small farmers. The preservation of this manifestly unfair system cannot be tolerated; radical reforms are indispensable. The truth is that capitalism has not only multiplied population figures but at the same time improved the people’s standard of living in an unprecedented way. Neither economic thinking nor historical experience suggest that any other social system could be as beneficial to the masses as capitalism. The results speak for themselves. The market economy needs no apologists and propagandists. It can apply to itself the words of Sir Christopher Wren’s epitaph in St. Paul’s: Si monumentum requiris, circumspice. *83 72. Cf. Sulzbach, German Experience with Social Insurance (New York, 1947), pp. 22-32. 73. Cf. above, pp. 288-289 and pp. 806-808. 74. Cf. above, p. 312. 75. Cf. above, pp. 804-809. 76. To establish this fact is, to be sure, not an endorsement of the theories which tried to describe interest as the “reward” of abstinence. There is in the world of reality no mythical agency that rewards or punishes. What originary interest really is has been shown above in Chapter XIX. But as against the would-be ironies of Lassalle ( Herr Bastiat-Schulze von Delitzsch in Gesammelte Reden und Schriften, ed. Bernstein, V, 167), reiterated by innumerable textbooks, it is good to emphasize that saving is privation ( Entbehrung ) in so far as it deprives the saver of an instantaneous enjoyment. 77. It makes no difference whether Paul himself pays these hundred dollars or whether the law obliges his employer to pay it. Cf. above, p. 602. 78. This refers especially to the writings of Professor A. C. Pigou, the various editions of his book The Economics of Welfare and miscellaneous articles. For a critique of Professor Pigou’s ideas, cf. Hayek, Profits, Interest and Investment (London, 1939), pp. 83-134. 79. Cf. F. H. Knight, “Professor Mises and the Theory of Capital,” Economica, VIII (1941), 409-427. 80. Cf. Aristotle, Politics, Bk. II, chap. iii in The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. R. McKeon (New York, 1945), pp. 1148 f. 81. The attempts to answer this question by statistics are futile in this age of inflation and credit expansion. 82. Cf. above, pp. 225-227. 83. If you seek his monument, look around. FIRST 42 LAST Categories: Ludwig von Mises